it's great to be here I have wanted to
come and visit the gray area foundation
for quite some time myself and Barry
have kind of missed each other a bunch
of times over the last year I think he's
been avoiding me and also we just
started our first ever artist in
residence in in the California in the
San Fran
just last week in partnership with
Leonardo on the International Society
for art science and technology and our
first artist is Jules LC as she likes to
go and be known by and we're very
excited about that and and also the
topic I'm talking about around
humanizing technology I haven't had the
opportunity to talk about this yet and
in this region and I think it's very
important and I'm probably preaching to
the choir but what I'd like to do is
give you the perspective from someone as
an engineer who works in a tech company
to give you that an alternative
perspective and maybe share some of the
ways that you might be able to open a
figure in the world of Amtech and insert
yourselves to drive societal impact so
I'd like to talk about that a little bit
so in my role where we run the modern
incarnation of experiments in Arts and
Technology I'm responsible for we bring
together the scientific engineering
technology community with the artistic
community and in that role I get to
think a lot about the intersection of
humanity and technology and I get to
think a lot about the role that
technology showed and I really stress
should play and better in humanity so I
hope to do in this talk is have you walk
away with a perspective from an engineer
scientist who's working in a big tech
company on the role that you can play as
engineers scientists technologists to
embrace this other way of thinking and
this more human centric approach to
develop technology the better humanity
and I'd like to push us all to consider
each of us as individuals and as
consumers and how we just accept the
crap that is posed upon us
technologically and I'd like to really
challenge each of you in this audience
who were artists creatives that you
shouldn't just wait here hoping that a
tech company will reach out to you I
think you should actually insert
yourselves but you need to do with the
career
Way and there's a bad way to do it in
which case you fail and there's a better
way to do it in which case you can have
massive impact and maybe in the
questions we can talk about that a
little bit cuz it's not necessarily part
of my slides so I'm going to talk about
I talk a lot about for the last few
years innovation what innovation is what
it is not more importantly creativity
and I've kind of come upon this recently
this kind of really solid wrap around
concept of humanizing technology that
I'm extremely passionate about so let's
just talk about innovation if everything
is innovative then nothing is innovative
okay so just because you work on
blockchain or AI or 3d printing or
whatever design thinking that doesn't
mean you're innovative that just it
already have an expression for that
you're working on these things just
because you release the next variant of
your product or whatever the next model
is of an existing product that's not
innovation that's just the next model
release innovation surely has to be
something different than what's already
come before it has to be something
beyond the incremental otherwise it's a
good point you know completely pointless
phrase a completely pointless concept
and the reason I get worked up about
this is because if we die loose what
innovation can be truly in its true
essence that means we're diluting the
ability for innovation and technology to
better humanity and that really upsets
me so let's look at the kind of
innovation right which humongous big
rabbit-ear quotation marks and let's
think about humanizing technology this
is a Kickstarter proposal that's already
got more than its required funding where
you put this contraption on your mouth
so that you can speak aloud in an Open
Office plan now hands up anyone think
this is humanizing or dehumanizing
I don't see hands some hands up
humanizing no okay great so you all
agree with me it's just complete
nonsense right but this is the tech
world we live in and this is really
driven out of this region here's another
one on the face but this kind of doesn't
seem so bad this is an iPhone case which
holds a fork and a spoon
ok so it's a bit funny but you might
think well there's some kind of utility
to that I can have my fork and my spoon
there's a it's a bit of an eco
sustainability play but let's just have
a look at how they expect you to use
this technology ok so you have to
consume your food while consuming your
digital content I mean if this is not
the greatest load of nonsense you've
ever seen in your life but there's so
many more examples I could go on I could
give a whole two days of a talk with
just with stupid examples about
engineers scientists and technologists
developing complete and utter nonsense
that really has no value in the world
and this upsets me because I'm a trained
engineer I work in the area of science
and I take the work that I do far more
seriously than this and I think we all
should okay so then what is innovation
so I think a very good definition of
innovation is that it has to be
something that's inventive and not or
and it must be impactful so inventive
means that something new something
unique something differentiated this can
come from research you can have new
things and research that might never
have impact and I can there can be lots
of inventive things and come in the art
world there can be inventive things in
the art world that might not have very
much impact in broader society but
there's still immense value in that on
the impact side you can also develop the
next smartphone that will generate
billions in revenue which has its place
in the world and I think we all use
smartphones so we can't really argue
with that too much and but maybe your
impact should be changing the world for
the better
Society and there's nothing wrong with
generating lots of money and maybe
changing the world for the positive but
that can be quite tricky so just to
remember next time you call your own
work innovative and next time you hear
someone describing their work of it as
innovative ask does it actually match
what is a proper definition of
innovation something new and something
that's impactful and my preference for
impactful is change the world positively
ok so what I'd like to do is just give
you a sense of how technology is being
developed today and I'd like to give you
a counter example in some of the work
we're doing with the artistic community
and it's not to say that our approach is
better but I just want to give you
sense that there is a different way so
that we don't have to get locked into
the current mode of developing
technology and throwing this junk
technology out of the world and then all
sis consumers just accepting it so let's
look at some of the big tech macro teams
of our time at the normal that is
getting a lot of buzz a lot of media
attention a lot of investments or
haptics so haptics is the kind of
simulation of touch in a virtual world
effectively it's done true typically
like your phone with vibrations in
vibrational motors but it can also be
brought into hot cold and pressure
things like that so this is the
technology of today haptic gloves that
you wear while you're in VR and then
they kind of simulate touch and via
these vibrations on your on your body
and I think this is kind of not
humanizing or kind of inhumane in a way
and look at this example when you pair
it with these big clunky Beor goggles
you have basically what are like digital
zombies in modern existence that kind of
reminds me of the show a little bit last
night but the thing is that this is what
we're forced to use today in our
existence and how we interface with
technology so this is the technological
approach with the artistic side when we
think about haptics and when I think
about a research roadmap or a product
roadmap if you want to use those terms
are a way that you can actually do
something with respect to haptics in a
more human way more human centric way we
look to artists we work with who are
musicians composers and we look to the
haptic and symbiosis between a musician
a subject matter expert and their
instrument which has been a relationship
that has existed for a very long time
and we try and learn about what makes us
human and what's innate in the human
condition around this importance around
physical touch and using our hands to
physically connect with other things and
we're learning a lot of the things we're
doing true the artistic community and
one lens we learn through is true music
and the relationship between a musician
and an instrument and I won't go into it
for the sake of time but you can check
out a lot of this work online quite easy
I'll just play a short clip here all's I
come as a humanist who's deeply
interested in the nature of
communication the second is as a
technologist who's trying to think about
how can I decrease the friction
a thing that allows someone to be
expressive and the expressive intent on
the other side so I won't go into that
because it takes too long but we've
learned quite a lot about how we might
develop haptic technology true the
things we've learned by engaging the
artistic community through this
particular lens let's talk about
robotics another big busy term at the
moment and lots of people worried that
robotics are going to kill humans or
whatever and this is the usual visuals
you see and then robotics gone bad of
course you can have a silly example in
our case we work with an artist called
Superman Chun and she's been doing a lot
of work in collaborations between human
and machine at drawing collaborations in
particular and what we really like about
this work is what we've learned around
the benefits of taking the best of
humanity and bringing that together with
the best of technology and in this
particular case as sue Gwen is live
drawing with a swarm of robots but what
she worked on was some of our video
analytics and machine vision technology
that we have that we use in smart cities
it looks at the complex patterns in a
smart city like New York or complex city
like New York and and then those
algorithms extract some of the patterns
and those data that those algorithms are
those data patterns were sent to the
robotic swarm they visualize the data in
certain ways in the soup when live drew
with the robotic swarm and interpreted
them in other unique news when we
learned a lot about how we visualize our
data how we extract patterns and
statistics from human flow and and we
learned so much more just through this
relationship with Sue Gwen that is
changing our entire research direction
around machine vision and data
visualization and actually our whole
thinking around the best of their
bringing the best of technology with the
best of humanity and the combination of
both of those is so much more than
either on their own and it's not an
either/or it's an and equation all the
time that functions as a gestural
emotion on the canvas
when I first met sue Gwen I loved the
line of her art and ultimately I don't
think it's about the technology I think
that we the technologist facilitates the
artist and I'm learning something from
them and they're learning something from
me
what makes collaboration really
interesting is that there's a lot of
give-and-take and vulnerability that's
required in it okay so the next big
buzzy thing VRA our virtual reality
augmented reality mixed reality every
other reality out there and lotta boughs
this is what the world we live in today
this is the dystopian tech future that
we might exist in this is the typical
approach that technologists engineers
are taking today and and V or largely
hasn't particularly gone anywhere a lot
of investment in us so the next wave of
investment has been an AR of mental
reality and of course there's a lot of
marketing a lot of driver and this and
one of these pieces of worked it's not
with an artist we've worked with but I
find this really interesting is called
hyper reality and this kind of sets a
vision in the very near term of the
future we might live in with a Oreo
Stoli Blamey
so you get the point and honestly I
truly believe within the next five years
on the path we're currently on and how
Czech companies are pushing this crap
upon us and how they're monetizing our
existence basically okay they monetize
our attention but truly they're
monetizing our existence
this is absolutely highly probable to be
our existence in the next five years and
and I'd love to have a debate with
anyone that would disagree with me and
this is really worrying to me because
this is an exact linear and
extrapolation of the world we currently
live in with social media and paid
advertisements and monetization of our
existence in my mind there's no way that
we don't live in this existence in the
next few years unless we do something
drastic to change our entire approach is
it quite worrying to me and I think
there's a very interesting artistic
provocation on the future of humanity
and its intersection with technology and
the market forces and the market we live
in where everything has to be monetized
so we work with an artist called Lisa
Park and Lisa developed a exhibit or a
piece called blooming and in this work
in typically in Lisa's work she looks at
kind of placing sensors and
understanding how humans communicate in
social environments and she looks to
make visible or make audible the
interactions between people that we
would normally be blind to and the
project with Lisa we asked her to focus
on the importance of touch in the human
condition so the fact that we've evolved
for 300,000 years where the physical
external manifestation of our inner
thoughts either come from our voice or
how we interact with the world through
our hands and the fact that we've
largely lost that in our modern
existence because everything is mediated
through our Tom's via smartphone we have
to try and explore the fact and the
importance that we've lost that part of
what makes us human so Lisa developed
this work called blooming and it's
basically a 3d holographic Cherry Tree
real size approximately when you enter
the space it's in its own blossom State
but when two or more people physically
touch hold hands touch shoulders hug
kiss whatever the cherry blossom
activates and grows based on the level
of
interaction they've had with them and in
this particular piece we learned an
awful lot about haptics
ARV or how you might in a more human way
a more human centric way connect people
both physically and digitally and
visually and and we had a massive a
really interesting response where a lot
of people that experienced this broke
down cried cut very emotional families
even strangers because in the feedback
we got it helped them realize that
they'd lost this physical connection
with their humanity and what other
humans and again as an engineer someone
in the world of tech this is
exceptionally powerful to me and my
colleagues to see that there's an
alternate path maybe you don't have to
go down the clunky haptic gloves you
don't have to go down the clunky VR
goggles you don't have to ruin our
existence with all this digital noise
there's a way we can go back and
reconnect with our humanity still using
technology in the right way but that it
brings us back to our humanity and more
deeply connects us so what I'll do is
I'll show a video this is not of the
final piece this isn't in more of its
prototype form and you also get to see
some of the backend tech shown here
which you would never have seen if you
had experienced this in person my name
is Lisa poor I use biometric sensors
like heart rate monitors and brave
devices to create interactive
installations and do performances
glooming is a interactive installation
based on the interactions between the
audience members by measuring their
conductivity their gestures and
heartbeats the tree starts to bloom or
it releases the petals of the ground
okay so you get the point you can check
out a lot of this online I don't want to
go into too much detail
okay the next big was AI artificial
intelligence Oh Oh humanity we're all
doomed and gloomed if you read the press
and the media and by the way most people
that write about this honestly don't
have a clue what they're talking about
so just take that with a massive pinch
of salt they just don't understand
technology and it's all headlight Grammy
grabbing and kind of stuff so just I'd
ask you to try and have your own
thoughts about this and read more
diversely than some of the big media
outlets that
talk about this stuff so we've worked
with a bunch of artists in fact we're
doing a bunch of stuff today that we
haven't gone public with yet but when
people think about AI this is the visual
they they have it's from terminator
obviously and this is even quadruple e
bad this is AI plus robotics and of
course we're doomed then and and there's
a lot of stuff about how far should we
augment ourselves I don't think that's
the right question there's a lot of talk
about bad AI comes from bad data in fact
I don't think that's the right statement
either
I think bad data and bad AI a bad AI
comes from bad scientists engineers and
developers who throw this junk out to
the world without really considering its
downstream effects and again as someone
that's trained in the field of stem and
engineering and it really upsets me that
these people are just trying this junk
out there and they just want to just
don't even think about what will happen
downstream it's not it's not good
practice so I get very upset about that
as well I think it's a disservice to the
STEM subjects so we have a project with
a beatboxer that's one of these people
that can make their voice sound like a
computer machine and with him we
developed this documentary series called
we speak music you can check it out
online it's a six-part
short documentary series but the final
two episodes focuses on the creative
potential of AI and in this work reaps
one is his name Harry F and he trained
using machine learning algorithms
machine learning is one of the kind of
foundation technologies within AI I a
digital twin of himself how to beat bugs
and after a certain point of time the
digital twin we call it second self gets
to a level of maturity that it gives him
back sounds and techniques that he has
never done in his life and absolutely
never gave a sh in the training process
and in the process of this the thing
that he trained ends up giving him back
to stuff he's never done before and that
pushes his creativity into a whole new
direction and if you think about it he's
one of the most gifted vocal experiment
experimentalists in the world he's a
very creative guy if AI can help him be
more creative what might it do for the
rest of us if it's designed the right
way if it's designed for the betterment
of humanity and that's the big if right
so the question is how
you going to insert yourself into the
tech community so that the nonsense that
goes on in the world today doesn't keep
on happening and I wouldn't just sit
there and hope that it happens you get a
commissioner you get a residency I think
we have to figure a way to actually
force your human-centric perspective
into the kind of stuff that's developed
around the world but obviously in this
region is one so I'm going to show you a
video this is a short clip of the final
episode of the documentary series which
happens to be a musical performance
piece where you can see that he starts
training his AI digital twin his second
self you it's visually represented and
then you can hear what it gives back in
the training process and eventually gets
to a level of maturity that he can
actually collaborate with us in a really
meaningful way
[Music]
one two three four five
five another piece of frozen relations
[Music]
before we see diem and the six Greece
okay for the sake of time you get the
pointer you can check it out online I
think it's really taught for provoking
and kind of subject matter so I'm not
going to talk about this and so you can
check out our work we won't work with a
bunch of artists in fact this is only
scratching the surface of the artists we
work with and and we need to update what
we have online as well because we have a
bunch of really interesting artists that
were working with currently and and you
can just do Bell lab search Eata
experiments in arts and technology but I
will point out one piece which is the
robotic arm there on the near the bottom
right as you're looking at it this was
by an artist called Jeff Thompson who
pointed out to me that we spend an order
of magnitude more of our time
interfacing with this thing than would
anyone else in our life not anything
else anyone else
that's kind of creepy right if you think
about it it's not right and so what he
did is again using machine learning
algorithms he trained the algorithms on
how he interface with his own form he
implemented those motions on the robotic
arm and you as an audience come in place
your hand under the robotic arm it then
touches you and strokes you just like
you touch your phone right and it's
super creepy and purposefully super
creepy because it's meant to provoke you
to think about what the hell am i doing
has been in that much time per day
touching this creepy device ok so just
very quickly I know I've gone a couple
of minutes over but I'll just try and
wrap this up in conclusion so I think
it's critically important that we bring
in a meaningful proper purposeful
long-term collaborative way together the
engineering scientific community and the
artistic community because they actually
operate in two completely different
modes and there's massive tension that
arises in the difference in those two
modes but if you can bridge that gap and
I believe that at the interface of these
two different disciplines and the
approaches we have that's where what I
would call true innovation can actually
emerge true impact true new things that
have real societal benefit and I think
when I think about the future the world
we need to live in what we need to
design for I think we need to design for
a magic or a logic inspiration those
kind of things
bring us back to our humanity and I
honestly truly believe in I have a
billion examples of this
I am only mildly exaggerating on the
benefits of bringing together art and
technology I could talk about this
forever with every artist we've ever
worked with we've had massive education
and learnings in our company and
bringing that perspective in okay so
just to wrap I think that technology has
the potential to lift humanity and and
positively impact us all but I think
it's been massively under leveraged
underutilized and people don't develop
technology properly with what our
humanity in mind which is very
disappointing
I think there's a number of reasons for
this that are well-known but I'll just
amplify some of them I think there's a
complete lack of understanding and of
what innovation and creativity actually
are they're completely overused
buzzwords there's a complete lack of
diverse perspectives in stem at the very
minimum it's just boring in the worst
case it's actually obscene and
disgusting and I think we need to fix
this rapidly and and honestly there's a
pandemic of mail pail and stale and I'm
obviously part of that but we need to
somehow figure out a way to alter this
and we have a complete lack of human
centric thinking our humanizing
approaches in how technology's been
developed and I mean across the world
although this particular region happens
to be particularly bad first at the
moment but this is a problem kind of
this acid emic problem across all of the
planners so what I just like to finish
with is to say well it's great to be
here and I just ask that you think about
some of these things your role as an
artist as a creative and how you might
impact the world positively by forcing
yourself in to this other tech world I'd
ask us all as consumers to think about
how we use and just accept the
technology that's put upon us and and
basically concluded ah thank you
[Applause]